---
layout: post
title: Liberation Shoes (Jiefang Xie)
date: 2019-04-29 18:00
tags: [life-writing, personal]
category: writing
comments: true
---

Jiefang Xie

There was one popular post in these 2 days on Chinese social media: images captured from a documentary named “[The last generation of Bang Bang](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dZ2NmxXETCY&list=PLRHs3ri5VfhNyQhaNoriga-lJ5zS3RvzM)”. It told a brief story of a man’s life engulfed by waves of social revolutions. I was touched  by the story and could not forget the last image of the post: A man, heavily-burdened with his Bang Bang, leaving the scene with his back towards the camera, in a pair of dirty green canvas shoes. I am familiar with those shoes.

Those shoes are called Jiefang Xie in Chinese, meaning Liberation Shoes. It was originally named around 1949, the time when the People's Republic of China established itself, as the military shoes for Chinese People's Liberation Amy (Jiefangjun). It was, at that time, a huge improvement, compared with prevalent cloth sneakers and straw sandals. Jiefang Xie soon became a very popular hit among Chinese citizens and peasants. These shoes had become a symbol of an era, where supply of materials were limited and everyone (or at least the majority) got satisfied with a pair of economically-produced shoes in an identical style. 

I had seen the shoes in history textbook’s illustrations, in comedies and documentaries. Though it was in the small village where my grandfather lived and still lives in, I made actual encounter and had connection with those shoes.

When I was young, there were only two sundry stores in that village. When I visited my grandfather, I sometimes went to wander around the shops to entertain myself, for there was not many people I knew in that village that I can play with, nor internet for me to surf. I saw those shoes lying silently on a dark shelf, on sale, with a price equivalent to one or two packages of Pringles chips.

I remember that my grandfather also had one, or maybe more than one, pair of that Jiefang Xie. He was often in those green shoes, unless it’s a freezing winter calling for boots. Those shoes were mixed with a dusty gray as they had been overworn. The design seems to be durable, yet not so comfortable to wear with its solid rubber soles. Similar to the story of last Bang Bang mentioned in the beginning, my grandfather’s life was hard, with his father previously being a landowner before the ‘liberation’. There was even a period when his sons had no right to gain higher education due to this family background. He does not talk much, but often sits in the sun silently with a smile. He is  a master of Chinese medicine and Yi Jing (Book of Changes). But when I tried to ask him about how to do the Chinese fortune telling, he would only teach me a mathematical multiplication trick.

I once planned to purchase one pair of those Jiefang Xie and wear them to my school.  It would be quite unique a style. Everyone else was madly in love with converse and later nike. Eventually I gave up that plan as my research told me the shoes got bad ventilation problems. With the techniques of producing shoes advances, Jiefang Xie had gradually become a history, a thing of the past. But I believe I will meet them somewhere someday in the future.  

